KB: Using Rook Ceph storage in Harvester (#41)
harvester/harvesterhci.io: kb/2023-08-23/using_rook_ceph_storage.md

---
title: Using Rook Ceph Storage in Harvester
description: Using Rook Ceph storage in Harvester
slug: using_rook_ceph_storage
authors:
  - name: Hang Yu
    title: Staff Software Engineer
    url: https://github.com/futuretea
    image_url: https://github.com/futuretea.png
tags: [harvester, rook, ceph, csi]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

> Harvester now offers the capability to install a Container Storage Interface (CSI) in your Harvester cluster. This allows you to leverage external storage for the Virtual Machine's non-system data disk, giving you the flexibility to use different drivers tailored for specific needs, whether it's for performance optimization or seamless integration with your existing in-house storage solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with Harvester v1.2.0, it offers the capability to install a Container Storage Interface (CSI) in your Harvester cluster. This allows you to leverage external storage for the Virtual Machine's non-system data disk, giving you the flexibility to use different drivers tailored for specific needs, whether it's for performance optimization or seamless integration with your existing in-house storage solutions.
```

One of the options for integrating external storage with Harvester is Rook, an open-source cloud-native storage orchestrator. Rook provides a robust platform, framework, and support for Ceph storage, enabling seamless integration with cloud-native environments.

[Ceph](https://ceph.io) is a software-defined distributed storage system that offers versatile storage capabilities, including file, block, and object storage. It is designed for large-scale production clusters and can be deployed effectively in such environments.

[Rook](https://rook.io) simplifies the deployment and management of Ceph, offering self-managing, self-scaling, and self-healing storage services. It leverages Kubernetes resources to automate the deployment, configuration, provisioning, scaling, upgrading, and monitoring of Ceph.

In this article, we will walk you through the process of installing, configuring, and utilizing [Rook Ceph](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/intro/) as a data disk for a VM within the Harvester environment.

## Install Harvester Cluster

> Harvester's operating system follows an immutable design, which means that most files in the OS revert to their pre-configured state after a reboot. To accommodate Rook Ceph's requirements, you need to add specific persistent paths to the `os.persistentStatePaths` section in the [Harvester configuration](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/dev/install/harvester-configuration#ospersistent_state_paths). These paths include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Harvester's operating system follows an immutable design, meaning that most OS files revert to their pre-configured state after a reboot. To accommodate Rook Ceph's requirements, you need to add specific persistent paths to the `os.persistentStatePaths` section in the [Harvester configuration](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/dev/install/harvester-configuration#ospersistent_state_paths). These paths include:
```

```yaml
os:
  persistentStatePaths:
    - /var/lib/rook
    - /var/lib/ceph
  modules:
    - rbd
    - nbd
```

After the cluster is installed, refer to [How can I access the kubeconfig file of the Harvester cluster?](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.1/faq#how-can-i-access-the-kubeconfig-file-of-the-harvester-cluster) to get the kubeconfig of the Harvester cluster.

## Install Rook to Harvester

Install Rook to the Harvester cluster by referring to [Rook Quickstart](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/quickstart/).

```bash
curl -fsSLo rook.tar.gz https://github.com/rook/rook/archive/refs/tags/v1.12.2.tar.gz \
  && tar -zxf rook.tar.gz && cd rook-1.12.2/deploy/examples
# apply configurations ref: https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/example-configurations/
kubectl apply -f crds.yaml -f common.yaml -f operator.yaml
kubectl -n rook-ceph wait --for=condition=Available deploy rook-ceph-operator --timeout=10m
```

## Setup the Ceph Cluster

### Option 1: Create a new Ceph cluster using free disks on the Harvester hosts

> 1. Create a new Ceph cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a new Ceph cluster.
```

```bash
# apply configurations ref: https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/example-configurations/#cluster-crd
kubectl apply -f cluster.yaml
```

> 2. Create the StorageClass `rook-ceph-block` and VolumeSnapshotClass `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Create the StorageClass `rook-ceph-block` and VolumeSnapshotClass `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`.
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f ./csi/rbd/storageclass.yaml -f ./csi/rbd/snapshotclass.yaml
```

### Option 2: Using an existing external Ceph cluster (Recommended)

> 1. Run the python script create-external-cluster-resources.py in the [existing external Ceph cluster](https://www.rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/CRDs/Cluster/external-cluster/) for creating all users and keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Run the python script `create-external-cluster-resources.py` in the [existing external Ceph cluster](https://www.rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/CRDs/Cluster/external-cluster/) for creating all users and keys.
```

```bash
# script help ref: https://www.rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/CRDs/Cluster/external-cluster/#1-create-all-users-and-keys
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rook/rook/v1.12.2/deploy/examples/create-external-cluster-resources.py > create-external-cluster-resources.py
python3 create-external-cluster-resources.py --rbd-data-pool-name <pool_name> --namespace rook-ceph-external --format bash
```

> 2. Copy the bash output

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Copy the Bash output.
```

> Example Output:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example output:
```

```
export NAMESPACE=rook-ceph-external
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_FSID=b3b47828-4c60-11ee-be38-51902f85c805
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_USERNAME=client.healthchecker
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_CEPH_MON_DATA=ceph-1=192.168.5.99:6789
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_USER_SECRET=AQDd6/dkFyu/IhAATv/uCMbHtWk4AYK2KXzBhQ==
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_DASHBOARD_LINK=https://192.168.5.99:8443/
export CSI_RBD_NODE_SECRET=AQDd6/dk2HsjIxAA06Yw9UcOg0dfwV/9IFBRhA==
export CSI_RBD_NODE_SECRET_NAME=csi-rbd-node
export CSI_RBD_PROVISIONER_SECRET=AQDd6/dkEY1kIxAAAzrXZnVRf4x+wDUz1zyaQg==
export CSI_RBD_PROVISIONER_SECRET_NAME=csi-rbd-provisioner
export MONITORING_ENDPOINT=192.168.5.99
export MONITORING_ENDPOINT_PORT=9283
export RBD_POOL_NAME=test
export RGW_POOL_PREFIX=default
```

> 3. Consume the external Ceph cluster resources on the Harvester cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Consume the external Ceph cluster resources on the Harvester cluster.
```

```bash
# Paste the above output from create-external-cluster-resources.py into import-env.sh
vim import-env.sh
source import-env.sh
# this script will create a StorageClass ceph-rbd
source import-external-cluster.sh
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f common-external.yaml
kubectl apply -f cluster-external.yaml
# wait for all pods to become Ready
watch 'kubectl --namespace rook-ceph get pods'
```

> 4. Create the VolumeSnapshotClass `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass-external`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Create the VolumeSnapshotClass `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass-external`.
```

```bash
cat >./csi/rbd/snapshotclass-external.yaml <<EOF
---
apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: VolumeSnapshotClass
metadata:
  name: csi-rbdplugin-snapclass-external
driver: rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com # driver:namespace:operator
parameters:
  clusterID: rook-ceph-external # namespace:cluster
  csi.storage.k8s.io/snapshotter-secret-name: rook-csi-rbd-provisioner
  csi.storage.k8s.io/snapshotter-secret-namespace: rook-ceph-external # namespace:cluster
deletionPolicy: Delete
EOF

kubectl apply -f ./csi/rbd/snapshotclass-external.yaml
```

## Configure Harvester Cluster

> Before you can make use of Harvester's **Backup & Snapshot** features, some essential configurations need to be set up through the Harvester [csi-driver-config](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.2/advanced/settings#csi-driver-config) setting. Here's how to do it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before you can make use of Harvester's **Backup & Snapshot** features, you need to set up some essential configurations through the Harvester [csi-driver-config](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.2/advanced/settings#csi-driver-config) setting. To set up these configurations, follow these steps:
```

1. Login to the Harvester UI, then navigate to **Advanced** > **Settings**.
1. Find and select **csi-driver-config**, and then click on the **⋮** > **Edit Setting** to access the configuration options.
1. In the settings, set the **Provisioner** to `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`.

> 1. Next, specify the **Volume Snapshot Class Name** as `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass` for the intenal Ceph cluster or `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass-external` for the external Ceph cluster. This setting points to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` used for creating volume snapshots or VM snapshots.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Next, specify the **Volume Snapshot Class Name** as `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass` for the internal Ceph cluster or `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass-external` for the external Ceph cluster. This setting points to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` used for creating volume snapshots or VM snapshots.
```

1. Similarly, set the **Backup Volume Snapshot Class Name** to `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass` or `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass-external`. This corresponds to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` responsible for creating VM backups.

![csi-driver-config](./imgs/csi-driver-config.png)

![csi-driver-config-external](./imgs/csi-driver-config-external.png)

## Use Rook Ceph in Harvester

> After successfully configuring these settings, you can proceed to utilize the Rook Ceph StorageClass, which is named `rook-ceph-block` for the intenal ceph cluster or named `ceph-rbd` for the external Ceph cluster. You can apply this StorageClass when creating an empty volume or adding a new block volume to a VM, enhancing your Harvester cluster's storage capabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After successfully configuring these settings, you can proceed to utilize the Rook Ceph StorageClass, which is named `rook-ceph-block` for the internal Ceph cluster or named `ceph-rbd` for the external Ceph cluster. You can apply this StorageClass when creating an empty volume or adding a new block volume to a VM, enhancing your Harvester cluster's storage capabilities.
```

---
title: Using Rook Ceph Storage in Harvester
description: Using Rook Ceph storage in Harvester
slug: using_rook_ceph_storage
authors:
  - name: Hang Yu
    title: Staff Software Engineer
    url: https://github.com/futuretea
    image_url: https://github.com/futuretea.png
tags: [harvester, rook, ceph, csi]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

Harvester now supports installing a [Container Storage Interface (CSI)](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/introduction.html) in your Harvester cluster to support and use external storage as the VM's non-system data partition. Leverage different drivers for specific purposes, such as performance optimization or integration with existing internal storage providers.

> The provisioner of the VM image still uses Longhorn. Before v1.2.0, Harvester only supports using Longhorn to store virtual machine data and does not support using external storage to store VM data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The provisioner of the Virtual Machine (VM) image still uses Longhorn. Before v1.2.0, Harvester only supports using Longhorn to store VM data and does not support using external storage to store VM data.
```

[Rook](https://rook.io) is an open-source cloud-native storage orchestrator, providing the platform, framework, and support for Ceph storage to natively integrate with cloud-native environments.

[Ceph](https://ceph.io) is a distributed storage system that provides file, block, and object storage and is deployed in large-scale production clusters.

Rook automates deployment and management of Ceph to provide self-managing, self-scaling, and self-healing storage services. The Rook operator does this by building on Kubernetes resources to deploy, configure, provision, scale, upgrade, and monitor Ceph.

> This article explains how to install, configure, and use Rook Ceph as a data disk for a VM in Harvester.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This article explains how to install, configure, and use [Rook Ceph](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/intro/) as a data disk for a VM in Harvester.
```

## Install Harvester Cluster

Harvester's OS has an immutable design, which means most files in the  OS revert to their pre-configured state after a reboot.

So we need to add some persistent paths used by Rook Ceph to `os.persistentStatePaths` in the [Harvester configuration](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/dev/install/harvester-configuration#ospersistent_state_paths).

```yaml
os:
  persistentStatePaths:
    - /var/lib/rook
    - /var/lib/ceph
  modules:
    - rbd
    - nbd
```

After the cluster is installed, refer to [How can I access the kubeconfig file of the Harvester cluster?](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.1/faq#how-can-i-access-the-kubeconfig-file-of-the-harvester-cluster) to get the kubeconfig of the Harvester cluster.

## Install Rook Ceph to Harvester

> Next, install Rook Ceph to the Harvester cluster by referring to the [Rook Ceph Quickstart](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/quickstart/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, install Rook Ceph to the Harvester cluster by referring to [Rook Ceph Quickstart](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/quickstart/).
```
```suggestion
Install Rook Ceph to the Harvester cluster by referring to the [Rook Ceph Quickstart](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/quickstart/).

```

> 1. Install Rook operator
> ```bash
> curl -fsSLo rook.tar.gz https://github.com/rook/rook/archive/refs/tags/v1.12.2.tar.gz \
>   && tar -zxf rook.tar.gz && cd rook-1.12.2/deploy/examples
> # apply configurations ref: https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/example-configurations/
> kubectl apply -f crds.yaml -f common.yaml -f operator.yaml
> kubectl -n rook-ceph wait --for=condition=Available deploy rook-ceph-operator --timeout=10m
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Install the Rook operator.

```bash
curl -fsSLo rook.tar.gz https://github.com/rook/rook/archive/refs/tags/v1.12.2.tar.gz \
  && tar -zxf rook.tar.gz && cd rook-1.12.2/deploy/examples
# apply configurations ref: https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/example-configurations/
kubectl apply -f crds.yaml -f common.yaml -f operator.yaml
kubectl -n rook-ceph wait --for=condition=Available deploy rook-ceph-operator --timeout=10m
```
```

> 2. Create Rook Ceph Cluster
> ```bash
> # apply configurations ref: https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/example-configurations/#cluster-crd
> kubectl apply -f cluster.yaml
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Create the Rook Ceph Cluster.

```bash
# apply configurations ref: https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/example-configurations/#cluster-crd
kubectl apply -f cluster.yaml
```
```

> 3. Create StorageClass `rook-ceph-block` and VolumeSnapshotClass `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`
> ```bash
> kubectl apply -f ./csi/rbd/storageclass.yaml -f ./csi/rbd/snapshotclass.yaml
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Create the StorageClass `rook-ceph-block` and VolumeSnapshotClass `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`.

```bash
kubectl apply -f ./csi/rbd/storageclass.yaml -f ./csi/rbd/snapshotclass.yaml
```
```

## Configure Harvester Cluster

We must configure some necessary information through the Harvester [csi-driver-config](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/dev/advanced/settings#csi-driver-config) setting before using Harvester **Backup/Snapshot** related features.

> 1. Login to the Harvester dashboard, navigate to **Advanced/Settings**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Login to the Harvester UI, navigate to **Advanced** > **Settings**.
```

> 2. Edit `csi-driver-config` by clicking `⋮`  > `Edit Setting`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Edit **csi-driver-config** by selecting **⋮**  > **Edit Setting**.
```

> 3. Add the provisioner `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Set the **Provisioner** to **rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com**.
```

> 4. Set **Volume Snapshot Class Name** to `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`, which refers to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` used to create volume snapshots or VM snapshots.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Set **Volume Snapshot Class Name** to **csi-rbdplugin-snapclass**, which refers to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` used to create volume snapshots or VM snapshots.
```

> 5. Set **Backup Volume Snapshot Class Name** to `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`, which refers to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` used to create VM backups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Set **Backup Volume Snapshot Class Name** to `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`, which refers to the name of the `backupVolumeSnapshotClassName` used to create VM backups.
```

Reviewer 2: Should this be `backupVolumeSnapshotClassName` instead of `VolumeSnapshotClass`?
<img width="1188" alt="Screenshot 2023-08-31 at 1 20 03 PM" src="https://github.com/harvester/harvesterhci.io/assets/83089978/44b359bf-4045-4aee-9fe8-be1743d3ff2f">

Author: backupVolumeSnapshotClassName is a field name.
VolumeSnapshotClass is a resource type name.
use VolumeSnapshotClass here

![csi-driver-config](./imgs/csi-driver-config.png)

## Use Rook Ceph in Harvester

> After performing these steps, we can use the Rook Ceph StorageClass `rook-ceph-block` when creating an empty volume or adding a new empty volume to a virtual machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After performing these steps, we can use the Rook Ceph StorageClass `rook-ceph-block` when creating an empty volume or adding a new empty volume to a VM.
```

Rook automates deployment and management of Ceph to provide self-managing, self-scaling, and self-healing storage services. The Rook operator builds on Kubernetes resources to deploy, configure, provision, scale, upgrade, and monitor Ceph.

This article explains how to install, configure, and use [Rook Ceph](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/intro/) as a data disk for a VM in Harvester.

## Install Harvester Cluster

Harvester's OS has an immutable design, which means most files in the  OS revert to their pre-configured state after a reboot.

So we need to add some persistent paths used by Rook Ceph to `os.persistentStatePaths` in the [Harvester configuration](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/dev/install/harvester-configuration#ospersistent_state_paths).

```yaml
os:
  persistentStatePaths:
    - /var/lib/rook
    - /var/lib/ceph
  modules:
    - rbd
    - nbd
```

After the cluster is installed, refer to [How can I access the kubeconfig file of the Harvester cluster?](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.1/faq#how-can-i-access-the-kubeconfig-file-of-the-harvester-cluster) to get the kubeconfig of the Harvester cluster.

> ## Install Rook Ceph to Harvester

Reviewer: do the following steps also work for the existing Ceph cluster? would prefer to add existing cluster integration steps as it would be more recommended instead of installing directly on the Harvester cluster.

Author: I will add the external ceph example

Author: Added

Install Rook Ceph to the Harvester cluster by referring to [Rook Ceph Quickstart](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/quickstart/).

1. Install the Rook operator.

```bash
curl -fsSLo rook.tar.gz https://github.com/rook/rook/archive/refs/tags/v1.12.2.tar.gz \
  && tar -zxf rook.tar.gz && cd rook-1.12.2/deploy/examples
# apply configurations ref: https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/example-configurations/
kubectl apply -f crds.yaml -f common.yaml -f operator.yaml
kubectl -n rook-ceph wait --for=condition=Available deploy rook-ceph-operator --timeout=10m
```

2. Create the Rook Ceph Cluster.

```bash
# apply configurations ref: https://rook.github.io/docs/rook/v1.12/Getting-Started/example-configurations/#cluster-crd
kubectl apply -f cluster.yaml
```

3. Create the StorageClass `rook-ceph-block` and VolumeSnapshotClass `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`.

```bash
kubectl apply -f ./csi/rbd/storageclass.yaml -f ./csi/rbd/snapshotclass.yaml
```

## Configure Harvester Cluster

> We must configure some necessary information through the Harvester [csi-driver-config](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/dev/advanced/settings#csi-driver-config) setting before using Harvester **Backup/Snapshot** related features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can make use of Harvester's **Backup & Snapshot** features, some essential configurations need to be set up through the Harvester [csi-driver-config](https://docs.harvesterhci.io/v1.2/advanced/settings#csi-driver-config) setting. Here's how to do it:
```

> 1. Login to the Harvester UI, navigate to **Advanced** > **Settings**.
> 2. Edit **csi-driver-config** by selecting **⋮**  > **Edit Setting**.
> 3. Set the **Provisioner** to **rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com**.
> 4. Set **Volume Snapshot Class Name** to **csi-rbdplugin-snapclass**, which refers to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` used to create volume snapshots or VM snapshots.
> 5. Set **Backup Volume Snapshot Class Name** to `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`, which refers to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` used to create VM backups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Login to the Harvester UI, then navigate to **Advanced** > **Settings**.
1. Find and select **csi-driver-config**, and then click on the **⋮** > **Edit Setting** to access the configuration options.
1. In the settings, set the **Provisioner** to `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`.
1. Next, specify the **Volume Snapshot Class Name** as `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`. This setting points to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` used for creating volume snapshots or VM snapshots.
1. Similarly, set the **Backup Volume Snapshot Class Name** to `csi-rbdplugin-snapclass`. This corresponds to the name of the `VolumeSnapshotClass` responsible for creating VM backups.
```
